The Project Gutenberg EBook of Apples in Appealing Ways, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Apples in Appealing Ways
       Home and Garden Bulletin No. 161

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: May 30, 2020 [EBook #62284]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APPLES IN APPEALING WAYS ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                    HOME AND GARDEN BULLETIN NO. 161
                     U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE




                                 APPLES
                          _in appealing ways_


   This bulletin supersedes Leaflet 312, “Apples in Appealing Ways.”
                 Washington, D.C.    Issued April 1969

 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
                                 Office
                Washington, D.C. 20402 - Price 15 cents




                                CONTENTS


                                                                    Page
  Choosing apples                                                      3
      Varieties                                                        3
      Quality of apples                                                3
  Storing apples                                                       6
      Brief storage                                                    6
      Longer storage                                                   6
  Recipes                                                              6
      Apples in the main course                                        6
      Apples in salads                                                 8
      Apples in breads                                                 9
      Apples in cakes and cookies                                     10
      Apples in other desserts                                        11
      Other apple recipes                                             14
  Index to recipes                                                    16




                                 APPLES
                          _in appealing ways_


Choose your favorite apple—a fragrant Winesap, a juicy Stayman, a tart
Northern Spy ... each variety has its own appeal. And the versatile
apple can lend flavor to your main course, salad, bread, or dessert.

An apple, eaten raw, makes a pleasant, low-calorie snack or dessert. A
medium-size apple contains only 70 calories.

Like other fruits, apples contain some vitamins and minerals. Bottled or
canned apple juice may be fortified with vitamin C.

In this publication, you’ll find useful facts about apples, recipes for
many of your favorite apple dishes, and some new or unusual ways of
preparing and serving apples.




                            CHOOSING APPLES


The large assortment of apples at retail markets provides a variety for
every need. It’s a good idea to learn to recognize some of the most
popular varieties. (See table, p. 4.)


                               Varieties

There are many good all-purpose apples, plus others especially suited
for preparing in certain ways.

Apples that “go to pieces” when cooked are usually best for applesauce;
those that keep their shape are best for baking whole. Tart apples are
good for cooking; sweeter apples, for eating raw. Early summer apples
are especially good in applesauce and pies because they’re likely to be
juicy, tart, and quick-cooking.


                           Quality of Apples

Be sure to buy good-quality apples. Those that are mature when picked
have the best flavor and texture. They should be firm and crisp, have a
good color, and be free from defects.

Most apples are marketed by grade, and many retail packages show
variety, grade, and size. U.S. grades for apples are U.S. Extra Fancy,
U.S. Fancy, U.S. No. 1, and combinations of these grades. U.S. No. 2 is
a less desirable grade. Apples from the far western States are usually
marketed under State grades which are similar to Federal grades.

Fresh apples and other fruits can develop bruises, blemishes, or other
defects because of poor growth or rough handling. They are sometimes
available at bargain prices.

                               _Know Your Apples_
    VARIETY        SEASON             DESCRIPTION                  USE
                               (Size, color, and flavor)    Raw  General Baking
                                                                 cooking  whole

Cortland         October to  Medium to large. Bright         •      •
                 March       striped red. Juicy,
                             moderately tart, crisp,
                             tender, fragrant.
Red Delicious    October to  Medium to large. Deep red,      •
                 April       five knobs on blossom end.
                             Sweet, firm, tender, fragrant.
Golden Delicious October to  Medium to large. Yellow.        •      •
                 March       Sweet, firm, crisp, tender.
Grimes Golden    October to  Small to medium. Yellow with    •      •
                 February    small dark specks. Moderately
                             juicy, slightly tart, firm,
                             crisp, tender, fragrant.
Jonathan         October to  Small to medium. Deep red.      •      •
                 February    Juicy, moderately tart,
                             tender, crisp, fragrant.
McIntosh         October to  Medium. Bright dark red with    •      •
                 March       stripes. Juicy, moderately
                             tart, tender, crisp, fragrant.
Northern Spy     October to  Large. Bright striped red.      •      •       •
                 March       Juicy, moderately tart, firm,
                             crisp, tender, fragrant.
Rome Beauty      November    Large. Yellow mingled with             •       •
                 to May      red. Juicy, slightly tart,
                             firm, rather crisp.
Stayman          November    Medium to large. Dull striped   •      •       •
                 to April    red. Juicy, tart, firm, crisp.
Winesap          January to  Small to medium. Deep bright    •      •       •
                 May         red with small scattered
                             white dots. Juicy, slightly
                             tart, hard, crisp, fragrant.
Yellow Newtown   February    Yellow. Juicy, moderately       •      •
                 to June     tart, hard, crisp.
York Imperial    October to  Medium to large. Light or       •      •       •
                 April       purplish red over yellow.
                             Lopsided shape, usually.
                             Slightly tart, hard, crisp.

    [Illustration:                                    BN-32499, BN-32525
    Red Delicious—fragrant, sweet, and an excellent choice for eating
    out of hand—combines well with other raw foods, as in cabbage-apple
    salad (p. 9).]

    [Illustration:                                    BN-32141, BN-32459
    Jonathan, one of many popular varieties that can liven up your
    general cooking, gives this cobbler a flavor boost. For the recipe,
    see page 14.]

    [Illustration:                                    BN-32140, BN-32458
    Tart, firm Rome Beauty is a classic choice for dishes such as baked
    apples that call for apples that retain their shape when cooked. The
    recipe is on page 11.]




                             STORING APPLES


Only perfect apples should be stored for later use. Use apples with
bruises, skin breaks, or decayed spots as soon as possible.


                             Brief Storage

Store slightly underripe apples for 2 weeks or less in a cool place, 60°
to 70° F., to ripen.

Apples that are ripe enough for eating will keep in your home
refrigerator for a week or longer. Place them in the humidifier
compartment or in a moisture-resistant container, such as a polyethylene
bag. Fruit needs some ventilation, however. The polyethylene bags in
which apples are sometimes purchased have small holes. If you prepare
your own bags for storing apples, cut a few scattered half-inch holes.


                             Longer Storage

Most varieties of apples will keep several months if stored at lower
temperatures. Freezing will lower the quality of apples.

For directions on long-term storage of apples, see Home and Garden
Bulletin 119, “Storing Vegetables and Fruits in Basements, Cellars,
Outbuildings, and Pits.” Send your request on a post card to the Office
of Information, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 20250.
Please include your ZIP Code.




                                RECIPES


Here are some of the many ways to use apples—in the main course of the
meal, in salads, in breads, in desserts, and in other ways. Let the
table on page 4 guide you in selecting the best apple variety for each
recipe. The flavor, texture, and juiciness of the finished product may
vary slightly with the kind of apple used.

Commercially canned applesauce was used in developing the recipes that
call for applesauce. If you use homemade applesauce in these recipes, it
should be similar in sweetness and juiciness to commercially canned
applesauce.

Raw apples may darken when the cut surface is exposed to air, especially
if the fruit has touched the iron in a knife blade or chopper. Protect
cut apples from darkening by mixing with fruit juice—lemon, orange,
grapefruit, or pineapple—before adding other ingredients.




                       Apples in the Main Course


                     Mincemeat-apple filled peaches

_8 servings_

  1 cup finely chopped apples
  ½ cup mincemeat
  ½ cup miniature marshmallows
  8 canned peach halves, drained
  Peach sirup, as needed

Mix apples, mincemeat, and marshmallows.

Place peaches in baking dish. Fill centers with apple mixture.

Pour a few tablespoons of the peach sirup into bottom of dish.

Bake at 375° F. (moderate oven) for about 20 minutes, until peaches are
thoroughly heated. To serve, arrange peaches on platter around meat.


                             Apple stuffing

_4 cups stuffing_

  ¼ cup butter, margarine, or bacon drippings
  ½ cup chopped onion
  ½ cup chopped celery
  4 cups diced, tart apples
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup sugar
  4 cups small bread cubes

Melt fat in a large frypan. Add onion, celery, and apples. Sprinkle with
salt and sugar.

Cook, turning occasionally, for 8 to 10 minutes or until apples are
lightly browned.

Add bread cubes and toss gently to blend ingredients.


                               HOW TO USE

_Pork shoulder with apple stuffing._—Sprinkle the inside of a 4-pound,
boned fresh pork shoulder with 1 teaspoon salt and pepper, as desired.
Spread with stuffing. Fold meat over stuffing and skewer. Place on a
rack, skin side up, in a shallow baking pan. Bake at 325° F. (slow oven)
for about 2½ hours or until meat is tender and the juice is no longer
pink.


                      Sweetpotato-apple casserole

_6 servings, about ⅔ cup each_

  1 can (18 ounces) sweetpotatoes, drained
  ¼ cup sweetpotato liquid or orange juice
  1 can (20 ounces) apple pie filling
  1 teaspoon grated orange rind, if desired
  1 teaspoon lemon juice
  1 cup bread cubes
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted

Arrange sweetpotatoes in a 2-quart casserole.

Blend remaining ingredients except bread cubes and fat. Pour over
sweetpotatoes.

Mix bread cubes with fat and sprinkle over apples.

Bake at 375° F. (moderate oven) until liquid is bubbly and bread cubes
are lightly browned.


NOTE: You may omit canned sweetpotatoes, apple pie filling, and ¼ cup
liquid. Instead, use 2 cups cooked sweetpotatoes and 2½ cups tapioca
apples (p. 14).


                          Panned apple wedges

_6 servings, about ½ cup each_

  3 tablespoons butter or margarine
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  5 cups pared apple wedges
  ⅓ cup sugar

Melt fat in a large frypan over moderately low heat. Mix lemon juice
with apples and pour into pan. Sprinkle with sugar.

Brown apples lightly on both sides, turning once.

If apples are not tender, cover and cook over low heat a little longer.


                          SERVING SUGGESTIONS

Panned apples are especially good served with pork, ham, fried chicken,
or sweetpotatoes.

Or, fill halves of baked, seasoned acorn squash with panned apples.




                            Apples in Salads


                        Jellied apple-nut salad

_6 servings, about ⅔ cup each_

  1 package (3 ounces) lemon-flavored gelatin
  1 cup boiling water
  ¾ cup cold water
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup finely chopped celery
  1½ cups chopped apples
  ¼ cup chopped pecans

Dissolve the gelatin in the boiling water.

Add cold water, lemon juice, and salt.

Chill until slightly thickened.

Stir remaining ingredients into the gelatin.

Chill until firm.


                               VARIATION

_Waldorf salad._—Omit gelatin, water, and lemon juice. Use 2½ cups
apples. Mix all ingredients, and blend in ¼ cup salad dressing or
mayonnaise. Makes 6 servings, ½ cup each.


                     Chicken- or turkey-apple salad

_6 servings, about ¾ cup each_

  2 cups cooked, chopped chicken or turkey
  2 cups diced or sliced apples
  ½ cup chopped celery
  ⅓ to ½ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
  1 tablespoon lemon juice, if desired

Combine ingredients; mix well.


NOTE: If preferred, moisten the salad with french dressing and omit the
mayonnaise or salad dressing.


                               VARIATIONS

_Pork-, ham-, or veal-apple salad._—Use one of these cooked meats
instead of poultry.

_Tunafish-apple salad._—Use 13- or 14-ounce can of tunafish instead of
poultry.

_Cheese-apple salad._—Omit the poultry. Use 3 cups of apples in the
recipe and add 1 cup diced cheese.


                        Apple-fruit combinations

For a tasty and colorful salad, fruit cup, or dessert, combine apples
and other fruits, cut or sectioned. For a salad, use large pieces, drain
the fruit, and place on greens. For a fruit cup or dessert, use smaller
pieces and add a little fruit juice.

To make six ½- to ⅔-cup servings, try one of these combinations:

  • 1 banana, 1 cup pineapple tidbits, 2 apples.
  • 1 cup strawberries, 2 oranges, 2 apples, ½ cup marshmallow bits.
  • 1 cup cranberry sauce, 2 oranges, 2 apples.
  • 1 banana, 1 apple, 1 cup dark sweet cherries, 2 oranges.


                           Carrot-apple salad

_6 servings, ⅔ cup each_

  1 large carrot, shredded
  3 cups diced apples
  ⅓ cup raisins
  ⅓ cup salad dressing or mayonnaise
  1 tablespoon lemon juice, if desired
  ⅛ teaspoon salt

Combine ingredients and mix well.


                          Cabbage-apple salad

_6 servings, ½ cup each_

  2 cups shredded cabbage
  2 cups diced apples
  2 tablespoons slivered almonds, toasted
  ⅓ cup salad dressing
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  1 teaspoon sugar
  ½ teaspoon salt

Combine ingredients and mix well.




                            Apples in Breads


                          Apple spice muffins

_12 muffins_

  ¾ cup milk
  1 egg, beaten
  ¼ cup melted fat
  2 cups unsifted flour
  ½ cup sugar
  1 tablespoon baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  1 cup finely chopped apples
  ¼ cup raisins

Add milk to egg; stir in fat.

Mix dry ingredients thoroughly; stir in apples and raisins.

Add liquid mixture and stir just until most of the dry ingredients are
moistened. Do not overmix; batter should be lumpy.

Fill greased muffin tins two-thirds full.

Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) 20 to 25 minutes until golden brown.


                            Apple coffeecake

_9 servings, 3 by 3 inches each_

  ½ cup light brown sugar
  2 tablespoons flour
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  1 to 2 teaspoons cinnamon, as desired
  ½ to ¾; cup sugar, as desired
  ¼ cup shortening
  1 egg
  ½ cup milk
  1½ cups unsifted flour
  2 teaspoons baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 cups thinly sliced apples

Blend together the brown sugar, 2 tablespoons flour, butter or
margarine, and cinnamon.

In another bowl, combine sugar, shortening, and egg; beat thoroughly.
Stir in milk.

Mix 1½ cups flour, baking powder, and salt thoroughly; stir into egg
mixture just until smooth.

Spread half the batter in a greased 9-inch square pan; cover with half
the apples; top with half the brown sugar mixture. Repeat.

Bake at 375° F. (moderate oven) for 45 to 50 minutes or until cake is
set.


NOTE: If preferred, put all the batter in the pan at once. Arrange
apples on top of the batter and sprinkle with brown sugar mixture.




                      Apples in Cakes and Cookies


                        Applesauce drop cookies

_Makes 5 dozen_

  ½ cup softened shortening, butter, or margarine
  1 cup sugar
  1 egg
  1 cup unsifted flour
  1 tablespoon baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon cloves
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  1 cup applesauce
  1 cup raisins
  1¾ cups quick rolled oats

Beat fat and sugar together until creamy. Beat in the egg.

Combine and thoroughly mix all dry ingredients except rolled oats. Stir
into creamy mixture until blended.

Stir in applesauce. Stir in raisins and rolled oats.

Drop by teaspoonfuls greased baking sheet.

Bake at 375° F. (moderate oven) about 15 minutes or until lightly
browned.


                     Applesauce Filling or topping

_For two 8-inch cake layers or a 9- by 12-inch cake_

  ⅓ cup brown sugar
  2 tablespoons cornstarch
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  2 cups (16½-ounce can) applesauce
  ½ cup chopped nuts, if desired
  Whipped cream or whipped topping, if desired

Blend dry ingredients in a saucepan. Stir in applesauce.

Cook over moderate heat until thick, stirring as needed to prevent
sticking.

Cool. Spread on cake.

Sprinkle with nuts, if desired; or add whipped cream or whipped topping
before serving.


                               VARIATIONS

_Coconut-applesauce filling._—Omit nuts. Mix ⅔ cup coconut with cooked
filling. Or sprinkle coconut on top of filling on cake.

_Broiled dessert._—Spread hot cake with warm filling and sprinkle with
the nuts or coconut. Place under a hot broiler for a few minutes until
lightly browned.


                         Fudgy applesauce cake

_9 servings, 3 by 3 inches each_

  ⅓ cup softened shortening, butter, or margarine
  1 cup sugar
  9 eggs
  1 cup unsifted flour
  ⅓ cup cocoa
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon allspice
  ½ cup chopped nuts
  1 cup applesauce
  ¼ cup milk

Beat fat and sugar together until creamy; beat in eggs.

Combine dry ingredients and mix well. Add nuts.

Add dry ingredients to creamy mixture with the applesauce and milk. Stir
only until blended.

Pour into a greased 9-inch square baking pan.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) about 45 to 50 minutes or until surface
is firm when touched lightly.

Cool before cutting.


                            Applesauce cake

_9 servings, 3 by 3 inches each_

  ⅓ cup softened shortening, butter, or margarine
  1⅓ cups sugar
  1 egg
  1⅔ cups flour
  1 tablespoon baking powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon cloves
  ½ teaspoon allspice
  1⅓ cups applesauce
  ⅔ cup raisins
  ⅓ cup chopped nuts

Beat fat and sugar until creamy and fluffy; beat in the egg thoroughly.

Mix dry ingredients together.

Stir dry ingredients into creamy mixture alternately with applesauce
until well blended. Stir in raisins and nuts.

Pour batter into a greased and floured 9-inch square baking pan.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) for 50 to 55 minutes or until cake
leaves sides of pan.

Cool in pan on rack.


NOTE: Sift a tablespoon of confectioner’s sugar on top of warm cake, if
desired.




                        Apples in Other Desserts


                              Baked apples

_6 servings_

  6 baking apples (See table, p. 4.)
  ½ cup honey or sugar
  ½ cup raisins, if desired
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  1 tablespoon butter or margarine
  1 cup water

Core apples without cutting through the bottom end. Peel about one-third
of the way down. Place in baking dish.

Mix remaining ingredients except fat and water; fill centers of apples.
Dot filling with fat. Pour water into baking dish.

Bake at 375° F. (moderate oven) about 45 to 60 minutes or until apples
are tender. If apples seem dry, baste frequently with liquid in pan.


NOTE: After baking, top each apple with a marshmallow, if desired, and
return to oven until marshmallows are lightly browned.

Or top with cream cheese softened with cream or milk and beaten until
fluffy.


                               VARIATION

_Pineapple- or cranberry-baked apples._—Omit apple filling. Instead,
fill apples with canned, crushed pineapple or whole cranberry sauce. Top
each apple with 1 teaspoon sugar and dot with butter or margarine.


                          Apple-cheese dessert

_6 to 8 servings_

  6 cups pared apple slices
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  1 cup sugar
  ½ cup unsifted flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ cup butter or margarine
  ⅔ cup finely shredded Cheddar cheese

Fill a 9- or 10-inch piepan or shallow baking dish with apples; sprinkle
with lemon juice and ½ cup of the sugar.

Mix remaining sugar, flour, salt, and cinnamon. Mix in fat until mixture
is crumbly. Stir in cheese. Spread over apples.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) about 45 minutes or until apples are
tender.


NOTE: Serve warm or cold. Serve with table cream or ice cream, if
desired.


                               Applesauce

_6 servings, about ½ cup each_

  6 cups apple pieces (cored only, or pared and cored)
  1 cup water
  ¼ to ⅓ cup sugar, as desired

Cook apples in the water in a covered saucepan for 10 to 15 minutes or
until tender. Add additional water, if needed to prevent sticking.

Mash undrained, cooked, pared apples or put unpared ones through a food
mill or sieve. Stir in sugar.


NOTE: Applesauce will vary in texture, juiciness, and tartness with the
variety of apple used.

    [Illustration: Lemon applesauce, spicy applesauce, raisin
    applesauce, three tasty variations of an old favorite.]


                               VARIATIONS

_Honey applesauce._—Sweeten the applesauce with honey instead of
granulated sugar.

_Spicy applesauce._—Cook 2 sticks of cinnamon with apples. Remove
cinnamon before mashing or sieving cooked apples.

_Raisin applesauce._—Add ¼ cup raisins to the hot applesauce.

_Lemon applesauce._—Add a little lemon juice to applesauce if needed for
tartness. Garnish with lemon slice and sprig of mint.


                         Applesauce chiffon pie

_9-inch pie_

  3 egg yolks, slightly beaten
  1½ cups applesauce
  ⅛ teaspoon ginger
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ cup milk
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ½ teaspoon grated lemon rind
  ½ cup sugar
  1 tablespoon gelatin
  ¼ cup cold water
  3 egg whites
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  9-inch baked pastry shell, or graham cracker shell
  Nutmeg, if desired

Mix the egg yolks, applesauce, ginger, cinnamon, milk, lemon juice and
rind, and half the sugar.

Cook over low heat, stirring constantly, until mixture thickens.

Sprinkle gelatin on water; let stand a few minutes.

Add gelatin to the hot mixture; stir until dissolved. Cool until thick
but not set.

Beat egg whites until foamy. Add salt and beat until stiff. Add rest of
sugar slowly, beating constantly.

Blend egg white mixture with thickened gelatin mixture.

Pour into the pie shell and sprinkle with nutmeg, if desired. Chill
until firm.


NOTE: Use only clean, sound-shelled eggs in this recipe.


                               Apple pie

_9-inch pie_

  Pastry for 9-inch, 2-crust pie
  6 cups tart, pared, sliced apples
  ¾ cup sugar
  1 tablespoon cornstarch
  ½ to 1 teaspoon cinnamon, as desired
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine, if desired

Fill a pastry-lined piepan with the apple slices. Blend dry ingredients
and sprinkle over apples; dot with fat, if desired.

Cut a few slits in pastry top for steam to escape. Place it on the pie
and seal edges.

Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) 45 to 60 minutes or until the apples are
tender and the crust is golden brown.


                               VARIATIONS

_French apple pie._—Sprinkle apples with ½ cup raisins. Add 1 tablespoon
lemon juice. Frost baked pie, if desired, with a mixture of ½ cup
confectioner’s sugar and 2 to 2½ teaspoons water.

_Cranberry-apple pie._—Use 1 cup fresh cranberries in place of 1 cup of
the apples. Increase sugar to 1¼ cups.


                             Tapioca apples

_6 servings, about ⅔ cup each_

  ⅔ cup sugar
  3 tablespoons quick-cooking tapioca
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  1½ cups water
  5 cups tart, pared apple slices

Mix sugar, tapioca, salt, and water in a large saucepan. Let stand while
preparing apple slices. Then, bring tapioca mixture to a full boil,
stirring to prevent sticking.

Add apples. Boil gently, covered, until apples are tender, 10 to 15
minutes. Stir occasionally to prevent sticking.


NOTE: Sprinkle with nutmeg and serve with plain or whipped cream, if
desired.


                               VARIATION

_Dessert apple slices._—Omit the tapioca. Do not stir apples while
cooking.


                             Apple cobbler

_6 servings_

  1 recipe tapioca apples (p. 11)
  ⅓ cup milk
  1 cup biscuit mix
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted
  ¼ cup sugar
  1 teaspoon cinnamon

Pour tapioca apples into a 9-inch square pan.

Stir milk into biscuit mix. Roll dough to 6- by 10-inch rectangle.

Spread dough with fat and sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon. Roll as for
jellyroll, starting from short side.

Cut dough into 12 slices ½-inch thick. Arrange on tapioca apples.

Bake at 425° F. (hot oven) about 20 minutes or until biscuits are
browned.


NOTE: Use one 20-ounce can of apple pie filling instead of tapioca
apples, if desired.




                          Other Apple Recipes


                              Mulled cider

_6 servings, about ⅔ cup each_

  1 quart apple cider
  1 teaspoon whole allspice
  1 teaspoon whole cloves
  2 sticks cinnamon
  6 thin lemon slices, if desired

Combine ingredients, except lemon slices, in a saucepan. Simmer covered
for 20 minutes.

Remove spices. Serve hot with lemon slices, if desired.


                               VARIATION

_Mulled apple juice._—Use canned or fresh apple juice instead of cider.


                         Apple-cranberry punch

_10 servings, about ⅔ cup each_

  1 quart apple cider
  1 cup sweetened cranberry juice
  1 teaspoon lemon juice
  2 cups ginger ale

Combine cider and fruit juices; chill in refrigerator.

Add chilled ginger ale just before serving.

    [Illustration:                                              BN-32460
    Hot mulled cider and a bowl of popcorn make a tasty snack for a
    chilly evening.]


                         Cranberry-apple relish

_Makes 1⅔ cups_

  1 cup cranberries
  2 tart apples, unpared, cored, quartered
  1 orange, unpeeled, quartered, seeded
  ½ cup sugar
  ⅛ teaspoon salt

Put fruit through food chopper, using fine blade.

Combine all ingredients.

Chill several hours before serving.


NOTE: Relish may be stored in the refrigerator for several days.


The following publications give additional ways to use apples. Single
copies are available from the Office of Information, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 20250. Send your request on a post card,
and be sure to include your ZIP code number in your return address.

  Fruits in Family Meals: A Guide for Consumers       G 125
  Home Canning of Fruits and Vegetables               G 8
  Home Freezing of Fruits and Vegetables              G 10
  How To Make Jellies, Jams, and Preserves at Home    G 56




                            INDEX TO RECIPES


  Apples in breads
      Apple coffeecake                                                 9
      Apple spice muffins                                              9
  Apples in cakes and cookies
      Applesauce cake                                                 11
      Applesauce drop cookies                                         10
      Applesauce filling or topping                                   10
      Broiled dessert                                                 10
      Coconut-applesauce filling                                      10
      Fudgy applesauce cake                                           10
  Apples in other desserts
      Apple-cheese dessert                                            12
      Apple cobbler                                                   14
      Apple pie                                                       13
      Apple-fruit combinations                                         8
      Applesauce                                                      12
      Applesauce chiffon pie                                          13
      Baked apples                                                    11
      Cranberry-apple pie                                             13
      Dessert apple slices                                            14
      French apple pie                                                13
      Honey applesauce                                                13
      Lemon applesauce                                                13
      Pineapple- or cranberry-baked apples                            11
      Raisin applesauce                                               13
      Spicy applesauce                                                13
      Tapioca apples                                                  14
  Apples in salads
      Apple-fruit combinations                                         8
      Cabbage-apple salad                                              9
      Carrot-apple salad                                               9
      Cheese-apple salad                                               8
      Chicken- or turkey-apple salad                                   8
      Jellied apple-nut salad                                          8
      Pork-, ham-, veal-apple salad                                    8
      Tunafish-apple salad                                             8
      Waldorf salad                                                    8
  Apples in the main course
      Apple stuffing                                                   7
      Cheese-apple salad                                               8
      Chicken- or turkey-apple salad                                   8
      Mincemeat-apple filled peaches                                   6
      Panned apple wedges                                              7
      Pork-, ham-, or veal-apple salad                                 8
      Pork shoulder with apple stuffing                                7
      Sweetpotato-apple casserole                                      7
      Tunafish-apple salad                                             8
  Other apple recipes
      Apple-cranberry punch                                           14
      Cranberry-apple relish                                          15
      Mulled cider                                                    14
      Mulled apple juice                                              14


                              Prepared by
                   Human Nutrition Research Division
                     Agricultural Research Service

                  This is a _Consumer Service_ of USDA

                         U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1969 O—322-786




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Apples in Appealing Ways, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APPLES IN APPEALING WAYS ***

***** This file should be named 62284-0.txt or 62284-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/2/8/62284/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

